README.md, before:

# NucleoTNC Firmware

Source code for STM32L432KC Nucleo32-based TNC (PCB & breadboard version).

http://www.mobilinkd.com/2019/06/24/nucleotnc/

# Building the Firmware

Use Eclipse with CDT and the GNU MCU Eclipse plugins.

If you are porting this to another build platform, you will need to
build the firmware using the same compiler and linker options.  As
with most firmware projects, there is a linker script with defines
the memory layout for for the Flash and SRAM.

Below are example compilation and linking lines for reference:

    arm-none-eabi-g++ -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mthumb -mfloat-abi=softfp -mfpu=fpv4-sp-d16 -O2 -fmessage-length=0 -fsigned-char -ffunction-sections -fdata-sections -fno-inline-functions -fsingle-precision-constant -fstack-usage -fstrict-aliasing -ffast-math -Wall -Wextra -Wlogical-op -Wfloat-equal -g -D__FPU_PRESENT=1 -DUSE_HAL_DRIVER -DARM_MATH_CM4 -DSTM32L432xx -D__weak=__attribute__((weak)) -DNUCLEOTNC=1 -I../Inc -I../Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Inc -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Inc -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Inc -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Drivers/CMSIS/Include -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Drivers/CMSIS/Device/ST/STM32L4xx/Include -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/include -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/CMSIS_RTOS -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/portable/GCC/ARM_CM4F -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/TNC -I/usr/arm-none-eabi/include -std=gnu++1z -fabi-version=9 -fno-exceptions -fno-rtti -fno-use-cxa-atexit -fno-threadsafe-statics -Wno-register -c -o TNC/HdlcFrame.o ../TNC/HdlcFrame.cpp 
    arm-none-eabi-g++ -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mthumb -mfloat-abi=softfp -mfpu=fpv4-sp-d16 -O2 -fmessage-length=0 -fsigned-char -ffunction-sections -fdata-sections -fno-inline-functions -fsingle-precision-constant -fstack-usage -fstrict-aliasing -ffast-math -Wall -Wextra -Wlogical-op -Wfloat-equal -g -T /home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/STM32L432KC_FLASH.ld -Xlinker --gc-sections -Wl,-Map,firmware.map --specs=nano.specs -o firmware.elf Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_adc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_adc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_cortex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_crc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_crc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dac.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dac_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dma.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dma_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_flash.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_flash_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_flash_ramfunc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_gpio.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_i2c.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_i2c_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_opamp.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_opamp_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_pwr.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_pwr_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rcc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rcc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rng.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rtc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rtc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_tim.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_tim_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_uart.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_uart_ex.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/CMSIS_RTOS/cmsis_os.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/croutine.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/event_groups.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/list.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/portable/GCC/ARM_CM4F/port.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/portable/MemMang/heap_4.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/queue.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/tasks.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/timers.o Src/arm_fir_f32.o Src/arm_fir_fast_q15.o Src/arm_fir_init_f32.o Src/arm_fir_init_q15.o Src/arm_fir_interpolate_init_q15.o Src/arm_fir_interpolate_q15.o Src/arm_offset_q15.o Src/arm_q15_to_float.o Src/freertos.o Src/main.o Src/stm32l4xx_hal_msp.o Src/stm32l4xx_hal_timebase_TIM.o Src/stm32l4xx_it.o Src/system_stm32l4xx.o TNC/AFSKModulator.o TNC/AFSKTestTone.o TNC/Afsk1200Demodulator.o TNC/AfskDemodulator.o TNC/AudioInput.o TNC/AudioLevel.o TNC/DCD.o TNC/Demodulator.o TNC/FilterCoefficients.o TNC/Fsk9600Demodulator.o TNC/Fsk9600Modulator.o TNC/Goertzel.o TNC/Golay24.o TNC/HdlcDecoder.o TNC/HdlcFrame.o TNC/IOEventTask.o TNC/Kiss.o TNC/KissHardware.o TNC/KissTask.o TNC/LEDIndicator.o TNC/Log.o TNC/M17.o TNC/M17Demodulator.o TNC/M17Encoder.o TNC/M17Modulator.o TNC/ModulatorTask.o TNC/NullPort.o TNC/PortInterface.o TNC/SerialPort.o newlib/_exit.o newlib/_sbrk.o newlib/_syscalls.o startup/startup_stm32l432xx.o 

All of the macros defined on the compiler line are important in order
to properly build the firmware.

# Installing firmware

Firmware can be installed via the storage interface (drag & drop), the
on-board ST/LINK port, or via USB DFU.

## Drag & Drop

For the NucleoTNC, the easiest way to install firmware is to copy the
firmware file to the TNC directly.  The NucleoTNC will show up as a storage
device when plugged in.  Just copy the firmware.bin file into the shared
folder.  The firmware will automatically install, the NucleoTNC will reset,
and the new firmware will be running.

## ST/Link

The ST/Link port is a debug port exposed by the NucleoTNC.  It can be used
by Eclipse and other IDEs to directly upload the firmware to the TNC.

## USB DFU

 1. Download the STM32CubeProgrammer.
    https://s3.amazonaws.com/mobilinkd/en.stm32cubeprog-1.4.0.zip
    This programmer will work on Linux, OS X, and Windows.

 2. Download the ELF file from the release (or that you have built from source).

 3. Run the STM32CubeProgrammer from the command-line. (Replace "firmware.elf" with the appropriate firmware filename.)

    ./STM32_Programmer_CLI -c port=USB1 -d firmware.elf -v -g 0x8000000

 4. When that is complete, the NucleoTNC will restart with the new firmware.

----

## Important Note
If you regenerate the STM32 code, please note that the LL ADC driver in
the 1.12.0 version of the HAL driver is buggy.

   Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Inc/stm32l4xx_ll_adc.h

This file has been modified to address the defect.  If it is replaced by
STM32CubeMX, please ensure that the defect has been fixed.

Details of the defect are available [on the ST community site](https://community.st.com/s/question/0D50X00009bLP0eSAG/adc-init-bug-with-optimization-o1-stm32l4 ADC init bug with optimization >= -O1).

----

## TNC Build Instructions

Please go here: [TNC Build Instructions](Build/NucleoTNC.ipynb)

Commit message:

Update README.md for Blaze dependency.

README.md, after:

# NucleoTNC Firmware

Source code for STM32L432KC Nucleo32-based TNC (PCB & breadboard version).

http://www.mobilinkd.com/2019/06/24/nucleotnc/

# Building the Firmware

Use Eclipse with CDT and the GNU MCU Eclipse plugins.

If you are porting this to another build platform, you will need to
build the firmware using the same compiler and linker options.  As
with most firmware projects, there is a linker script with defines
the memory layout for for the Flash and SRAM.

## Blaze Dependency

There is a new dependency as of 2.4.3 with the addition of the Kalman
filter.  The firmware has a dependency on the Blaze C++ math library.

    mkdir blaze
    ln -s /usr/include/blaze blaze/

This also requires (for now) that the firmware be built with exceptions
enabled.

## Example GCC Command-line

Below are example compilation and linking lines for reference:

    arm-none-eabi-g++ -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mthumb -mfloat-abi=softfp -mfpu=fpv4-sp-d16 -O2 -fmessage-length=0 -fsigned-char -ffunction-sections -fdata-sections -fno-inline-functions -fsingle-precision-constant -fstack-usage -fstrict-aliasing -ffast-math -Wall -Wextra -Wlogical-op -Wfloat-equal -g -D__FPU_PRESENT=1 -DUSE_HAL_DRIVER -DARM_MATH_CM4 -DSTM32L432xx -D__weak=__attribute__((weak)) -DNUCLEOTNC=1 -I../Inc -I../Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Inc -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Inc -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Inc -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Drivers/CMSIS/Include -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Drivers/CMSIS/Device/ST/STM32L4xx/Include -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/include -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/CMSIS_RTOS -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/portable/GCC/ARM_CM4F -I/home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/TNC -I/usr/arm-none-eabi/include -std=gnu++1z -fabi-version=9 -fno-exceptions -fno-rtti -fno-use-cxa-atexit -fno-threadsafe-statics -Wno-register -c -o TNC/HdlcFrame.o ../TNC/HdlcFrame.cpp 
    arm-none-eabi-g++ -mcpu=cortex-m4 -mthumb -mfloat-abi=softfp -mfpu=fpv4-sp-d16 -O2 -fmessage-length=0 -fsigned-char -ffunction-sections -fdata-sections -fno-inline-functions -fsingle-precision-constant -fstack-usage -fstrict-aliasing -ffast-math -Wall -Wextra -Wlogical-op -Wfloat-equal -g -T /home/rob/workspace/Nucleo_L432KC_TNC/STM32L432KC_FLASH.ld -Xlinker --gc-sections -Wl,-Map,firmware.map --specs=nano.specs -o firmware.elf Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_adc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_adc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_cortex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_crc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_crc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dac.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dac_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dma.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_dma_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_flash.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_flash_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_flash_ramfunc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_gpio.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_i2c.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_i2c_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_opamp.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_opamp_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_pwr.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_pwr_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rcc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rcc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rng.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rtc.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_rtc_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_tim.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_tim_ex.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_uart.o Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Src/stm32l4xx_hal_uart_ex.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/CMSIS_RTOS/cmsis_os.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/croutine.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/event_groups.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/list.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/portable/GCC/ARM_CM4F/port.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/portable/MemMang/heap_4.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/queue.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/tasks.o Middlewares/Third_Party/FreeRTOS/Source/timers.o Src/arm_fir_f32.o Src/arm_fir_fast_q15.o Src/arm_fir_init_f32.o Src/arm_fir_init_q15.o Src/arm_fir_interpolate_init_q15.o Src/arm_fir_interpolate_q15.o Src/arm_offset_q15.o Src/arm_q15_to_float.o Src/freertos.o Src/main.o Src/stm32l4xx_hal_msp.o Src/stm32l4xx_hal_timebase_TIM.o Src/stm32l4xx_it.o Src/system_stm32l4xx.o TNC/AFSKModulator.o TNC/AFSKTestTone.o TNC/Afsk1200Demodulator.o TNC/AfskDemodulator.o TNC/AudioInput.o TNC/AudioLevel.o TNC/DCD.o TNC/Demodulator.o TNC/FilterCoefficients.o TNC/Fsk9600Demodulator.o TNC/Fsk9600Modulator.o TNC/Goertzel.o TNC/Golay24.o TNC/HdlcDecoder.o TNC/HdlcFrame.o TNC/IOEventTask.o TNC/Kiss.o TNC/KissHardware.o TNC/KissTask.o TNC/LEDIndicator.o TNC/Log.o TNC/M17.o TNC/M17Demodulator.o TNC/M17Encoder.o TNC/M17Modulator.o TNC/ModulatorTask.o TNC/NullPort.o TNC/PortInterface.o TNC/SerialPort.o newlib/_exit.o newlib/_sbrk.o newlib/_syscalls.o startup/startup_stm32l432xx.o 

All of the macros defined on the compiler line are important in order
to properly build the firmware.

# Installing firmware

Firmware can be installed via the storage interface (drag & drop), the
on-board ST/LINK port, or via USB DFU.

## Drag & Drop

For the NucleoTNC, the easiest way to install firmware is to copy the
firmware file to the TNC directly.  The NucleoTNC will show up as a storage
device when plugged in.  Just copy the firmware.bin file into the shared
folder.  The firmware will automatically install, the NucleoTNC will reset,
and the new firmware will be running.

## ST/Link

The ST/Link port is a debug port exposed by the NucleoTNC.  It can be used
by Eclipse and other IDEs to directly upload the firmware to the TNC.

## USB DFU

 1. Download the STM32CubeProgrammer.
    https://s3.amazonaws.com/mobilinkd/en.stm32cubeprog-1.4.0.zip
    This programmer will work on Linux, OS X, and Windows.

 2. Download the ELF file from the release (or that you have built from source).

 3. Run the STM32CubeProgrammer from the command-line. (Replace "firmware.elf" with the appropriate firmware filename.)

    ./STM32_Programmer_CLI -c port=USB1 -d firmware.elf -v -g 0x8000000

 4. When that is complete, the NucleoTNC will restart with the new firmware.

----

## Important Note
If you regenerate the STM32 code, please note that the LL ADC driver in
the 1.12.0 version of the HAL driver is buggy.

   Drivers/STM32L4xx_HAL_Driver/Inc/stm32l4xx_ll_adc.h

This file has been modified to address the defect.  If it is replaced by
STM32CubeMX, please ensure that the defect has been fixed.

Details of the defect are available [on the ST community site](https://community.st.com/s/question/0D50X00009bLP0eSAG/adc-init-bug-with-optimization-o1-stm32l4 ADC init bug with optimization >= -O1).

----

## TNC Build Instructions

Please go here: [TNC Build Instructions](Build/NucleoTNC.ipynb)
